Document how to handle compatibility breakages (#9158)
godotengine/godot-docs: contributing/development/handling_compatibility_breakages.rst

.. _doc_handling_compatibility_breakages:

Handling compatibility breakages
=================================

So you've added a new argument to a method, changed the return type,
changed the type of an argument, or changed the default value of an argument,

> and now the automated testing is complaining about compatibility breakages?

Reviewer: Technically those are parameters (declared in the signature) rather than arguments (values passed in). But I've seen Godot often use the latter... so not sure?

Not to worry, there's a system to handle just that!

> Compatibility is handled in a few different ways, in GDScript this is simple,
> new arguments are usually given default values when added so existing scripts
> won't break, and types are flexible in GDScript which makes this work well.

Reviewer: Quite long sentence, some punctuation might help the flow:
```suggestion
Compatibility is handled in a few different ways. In GDScript this is simple:
new arguments are usually given default values when added, so existing scripts
won't break. Types are flexible in GDScript which makes this work well.
```

I'm not exactly sure what you mean by "Types are flexible in GDScript which makes this work well." -- what does "flexible" refer to here?

Author: It was related to how weak typing and similar works in GDScript but it's not necessarily helpful here, so removing it, it was how you can change a signature more safely than a compiled language

> However in other cases, like GDExtension and C#, the exact way the method is
> declared matters and must be matched exactly. This is handled by creating
> compatibility methods that then gets translated to the new versions of these
> methods. All of this happens *almost* automatically, there are just a few
> things you need to do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However in other cases, like GDExtension and C#, the exact way the method is
declared matters and must be matched exactly. This is handled by creating
compatibility methods that then get translated to the new versions of these
methods. All of this happens *almost* automatically, there are just a few
things you need to do.
```
And maybe "mapped" is a bit clearer than "translated" here?

Binding compatibility methods
-----------------------------

> Just like how you use ``ClassDB`` to bind methods there's a way to bind
> compatibility methods, and conveniently these are named very similarly to their
> normal counterparts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just like how you use ``ClassDB`` to bind methods, there's a way to bind
compatibility methods, and conveniently these are named very similarly to their
normal counterparts.
```

.. _doc_handling_compatibility_breakages:

Handling compatibility breakages
================================

.. TODO: Elaborate on types of compatibility and procedure.

So you've added a new parameter to a method, changed the return type,
changed the type of a parameter, or changed its default value,
and now the automated testing is complaining about compatibility breakages?

> Breaking compatibility should be avoided, but when necessary there are systems in place
> to handle this in a way that helps to make it as smooth as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Breaking compatibility should be avoided, but when necessary there are systems in place
to handle this in a way, which makes the transition as smooth as possible.
```

> to handle this in a way that makes the transition as smoothly as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to handle this in a way that makes the transition as smooth as possible.
```
This was better before, "smooth" is an adjective referring to "transition".

"smoothly" as an adverb would refer to a verb, e.g. "it transitions smoothly" :wink:

Author: Yep, realized after, only read part of the sentence when fixing

A practical example
-------------------

.. TODO: Add example that showcases more details like original default arguments etc.

These changes are taken from `pull request #88047 <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/88047>`_, which added
new pathing options to ``AStarGrid2D`` and other AStar classes.
Among other changes, these methods were modified in ``core/math/a_star_grid_2d.h``:

.. code-block:: cpp

    Vector<Vector2> get_point_path(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to);
    TypedArray<Vector2i> get_id_path(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to);

To:

.. code-block:: cpp

    Vector<Vector2> get_point_path(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to, bool p_allow_partial_path = false);
    TypedArray<Vector2i> get_id_path(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to, bool p_allow_partial_path = false);

This meant adding new compatibility method bindings to the file, which should be in the ``protected`` section of

> the code, usually placed next to ``_bind_methods()``:

Reviewer: You could briefly explain the concept of compatibility methods and explain why they're needed in the first place, something along:

> For the GDExtension API, we provide backwards compatibility with earlier versions: for example, a C++ extension compiled with Godot 4.1 still runs under Godot 4.3. For this to be possible, old member functions must remain available in their original signature, in addition to new version of those functions. We call the old function "compatibility method".

Author: Did so but it's hard not to get verbose, leaving this for a follow up PR

Author: I don't think it's necessarily too verbose either, but I think some of the details like that can be added later and just get the functional examples needed to help with development out there

    /* CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,   */
    /* TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE      */
    /* SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                 */
    /**************************************************************************/

    #ifndef DISABLE_DEPRECATED

    #include "core/variant/typed_array.h"

    TypedArray<Vector2i> AStarGrid2D::_get_id_path_bind_compat_88047(const Vector2i &p_from_id, const Vector2i &p_to_id) {
        return get_id_path(p_from_id, p_to_id, false);
    }

    Vector<Vector2> AStarGrid2D::_get_point_path_bind_compat_88047(const Vector2i &p_from_id, const Vector2i &p_to_id) {
        return get_point_path(p_from_id, p_to_id, false);
    }

    void AStarGrid2D::_bind_compatibility_methods() {
        ClassDB::bind_compatibility_method(D_METHOD("get_id_path", "from_id", "to_id"), &AStarGrid2D::_get_id_path_bind_compat_88047);
        ClassDB::bind_compatibility_method(D_METHOD("get_point_path", "from_id", "to_id"), &AStarGrid2D::_get_point_path_bind_compat_88047);
    }

    #endif // DISABLE_DEPRECATED

> Unless the change in compatibility is complex the compatibility method should simply call the normal method directly, instead of duplicating
> the method, making sure to match the default arguments of the bind.

Reviewer: Slightly shorter sentences:
```suggestion
Unless the change in compatibility is complex, the compatibility method should simply call the new method directly, instead of duplicating
it. This makes sure that default arguments of the bind are matched.
```

Not quite sure about the last part -- for a user, what does "match the bind" mean? Maybe this can be written in easier-to-understand terms?

Author: This is not what it is meant to say, and there's no "new" method, the method has just changed signature, but can clarify the description of the bind part, but to clarify it means that it should match the method bind `ClassDB::bind_method`

Reviewer: "New" as in "with the new signature", maybe this could be clarified.
I'm just not sure if "normal" is that obvious in this context, but you can also leave it if you think it is 🙂

Author: I think the example code should make it obvious what the text means, but can look at clarifying some details

This file should always be placed next to the original file, and have ``.compat.inc`` at the end instead of ``.cpp`` or ``.h``.

> Next this should be included in the ``.cpp`` file we're adding compatibility methods to, so ``core/math/a_star_grid_2d.cpp``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, this should be included in the ``.cpp`` file we're adding compatibility methods to, so ``core/math/a_star_grid_2d.cpp``:
```

Author: I'm not sure about breaking the sentence there it feels quite abrupt to me

Reviewer: I'm pretty sure it's correct though. "Next" acts as an adverb like "Furthermore, ..." or "Additionally, ...".

I didn't find a very good source on this, here are still some: [1](https://www.pristineword.com/comma-next/) [2](https://linguaholic.com/linguablog/comma-after-next/) [3](https://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/qanda/data/faq/topics/Punctuation/faq0001.html) [4](https://www.scribbr.com/category/commas/)

    Validate extension JSON: Error: Field 'classes/AStar3D/methods/get_id_path/arguments': size changed value in new API, from 2 to 3.
    Validate extension JSON: Error: Field 'classes/AStar3D/methods/get_point_path/arguments': size changed value in new API, from 2 to 3.
    Validate extension JSON: Error: Field 'classes/AStarGrid2D/methods/get_id_path/arguments': size changed value in new API, from 2 to 3.
    Validate extension JSON: Error: Field 'classes/AStarGrid2D/methods/get_point_path/arguments': size changed value in new API, from 2 to 3.

    Added optional "allow_partial_path" argument to get_id_path and get_point_path methods in AStar classes.
    Compatibility methods registered.

The instructions for how to add to that file are at the top of the file itself.

If you get a "Hash changed" error for a method, it means that the compatibility binding is missing or incorrect.
Such lines shouldn't be added to the ``.expected`` file, but fixed by binding the proper compatibility method.

And that's it! You might run into a bit more complicated cases, like rearranging arguments,
changing return types, etc., but this covers the basic on how to use this system.

> For more information see `pull request #76446 <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76446>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see `pull request #76446 <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76446>`._
```

    /* SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                 */
    /**************************************************************************/

    #ifndef DISABLE_DEPRECATED

    #include "core/variant/typed_array.h"

    TypedArray<Vector2i> AStarGrid2D::_get_id_path_bind_compat_88047(const Vector2i &p_from_id, const Vector2i &p_to_id) {
        return get_id_path(p_from_id, p_to_id, false);
    }

    Vector<Vector2> AStarGrid2D::_get_point_path_bind_compat_88047(const Vector2i &p_from_id, const Vector2i &p_to_id) {
        return get_point_path(p_from_id, p_to_id, false);
    }

    void AStarGrid2D::_bind_compatibility_methods() {
        ClassDB::bind_compatibility_method(D_METHOD("get_id_path", "from_id", "to_id"), &AStarGrid2D::_get_id_path_bind_compat_88047);
        ClassDB::bind_compatibility_method(D_METHOD("get_point_path", "from_id", "to_id"), &AStarGrid2D::_get_point_path_bind_compat_88047);
    }

    #endif // DISABLE_DEPRECATED

Unless the change in compatibility is complex the compatibility method should simply call the normal method directly, instead of duplicating

> the method, making sure to match the default arguments of the bind.

Author: Added this to emphasize this part, might be worded better

.. _doc_handling_compatibility_breakages:

Handling compatibility breakages
=================================

So you've added a new parameter to a method, changed the return type,
changed the type of a parameter, or changed its default value,
and now the automated testing is complaining about compatibility breakages?

Not to worry, there's a system to handle just that!

Compatibility is handled in a few different ways. In GDScript this is simple,
new arguments are usually given default values when added, so existing scripts
won't break in such cases.

However in other cases, like GDExtension and C#, the exact way the method is
declared matters and must be matched exactly. This is handled by creating
compatibility methods that then get mapped to the new versions of these
methods. All of this happens *almost* automatically, there are just a few
things you need to do.

Binding compatibility methods
-----------------------------

Just like how you use ``ClassDB`` to bind methods, there's a way to bind
compatibility methods, and conveniently these are named very similarly to their
ordinary counterparts.

.. code-block:: cpp

>     ClassDB::bind_method(D_METHOD("my_method", "arg1", "arg2"), &MyClass::my_method);
>     ClassDB::bind_compatibility_method(D_METHOD("my_method", "arg1", "arg2", "arg3"), &MyClass::_my_method_bind_compat_1234, DEFVAL(0));

Reviewer 2: While this is a totally valid example of an argument being removed, I feel like the reverse case is more common: adding a new argument to method. So, I'd personally reverse these:

```suggestion
    ClassDB::bind_method(D_METHOD("my_method", "arg1", "arg2", "arg3"), &MyClass::my_method, DEFVAL(0));
    ClassDB::bind_compatibility_method(D_METHOD("my_method", "arg1", "arg2"), &MyClass::_my_method_bind_compat_1234);
```

These changes are taken from `pull request #88047 <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/88047>`_, which added
new pathing options to ``AStarGrid2D``. Which among other changes changed these methods in ``core/math/a_star_grid_2d.h``:

.. code-block:: cpp

    Vector<Vector2> get_point_path(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to);
    TypedArray<Vector2i> get_id_path(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to);

To:

.. code-block:: cpp

    Vector<Vector2> get_point_path(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to, bool p_allow_partial_path = false);
    TypedArray<Vector2i> get_id_path(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to, bool p_allow_partial_path = false);

This meant adding new compatibility bind methods to the file, which should be in the ``protected`` section of
the code, usually placed next to ``bind_methods()``:

.. code-block:: cpp

    #ifndef DISABLE_DEPRECATED
        TypedArray<Vector2i> _get_id_path_bind_compat_88047(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to);
        Vector<Vector2> _get_point_path_bind_compat_88047(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to);
        static void _bind_compatibility_methods();
    #endif

> Note the ``88047`` at the end of the method names should match the PR number, they should also start with a ``_`` to
> indicate that they are internal, and end with ``_bind_compat`` followed by the PR number. These compatibility methods

Reviewer 2: This redundantly mentions the "PR number" twice in the same sentence. Maybe:

```suggestion
They should start with a ``_`` to indicate that they are internal, and end with ``_bind_compat`` followed by the PR number that introduced the change (``88047`` in this example). These compatibility methods
```

> need to be defined as well, and these were added in a dedicated file, in this case ``core/math/a_star_grid_2d.compat.inc``:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
need to be implemented in a dedicated file, like ``core/math/a_star_grid_2d.compat.inc`` in this case:
```

    #include "core/variant/typed_array.h"

    TypedArray<Vector2i> AStarGrid2D::_get_id_path_bind_compat_88047(const Vector2i &p_from_id, const Vector2i &p_to_id) {
        return get_id_path(p_from_id, p_to_id, false);
    }

    Vector<Vector2> AStarGrid2D::_get_point_path_bind_compat_88047(const Vector2i &p_from_id, const Vector2i &p_to_id) {
        return get_point_path(p_from_id, p_to_id, false);
    }

    void AStarGrid2D::_bind_compatibility_methods() {
        ClassDB::bind_compatibility_method(D_METHOD("get_id_path", "from_id", "to_id"), &AStarGrid2D::_get_id_path_bind_compat_88047);
        ClassDB::bind_compatibility_method(D_METHOD("get_point_path", "from_id", "to_id"), &AStarGrid2D::_get_point_path_bind_compat_88047);
    }

    #endif // DISABLE_DEPRECATED

This file should always be placed next to the original file, and have ``.compat.inc`` at the end instead of ``.cpp`` or ``.h``.
Next this should be included in the ``.cpp`` file we're adding compatibility methods to, so ``core/math/a_star_grid_2d.cpp``:

.. code-block:: cpp

    #include "a_star_grid_2d.h"
    #include "a_star_grid_2d.compat.inc"

    #include "core/variant/typed_array.h"

> And finally the changes reported by the API validation step should be added to the relevant validation file, which because this was
> done during the development of 4.3 would be ``misc/extension_api_validation/4.2-stable.expected`` (including changes not shown in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And finally, the changes reported by the API validation step should be added to the relevant validation file. Because this was
done during the development of 4.3, this would be ``misc/extension_api_validation/4.2-stable.expected`` (including changes not shown in
```

this example):

.. code-block:: text

    GH-88047
    --------
    Validate extension JSON: Error: Field 'classes/AStar2D/methods/get_id_path/arguments': size changed value in new API, from 2 to 3.
    Validate extension JSON: Error: Field 'classes/AStar2D/methods/get_point_path/arguments': size changed value in new API, from 2 to 3.
    Validate extension JSON: Error: Field 'classes/AStar3D/methods/get_id_path/arguments': size changed value in new API, from 2 to 3.
    Validate extension JSON: Error: Field 'classes/AStar3D/methods/get_point_path/arguments': size changed value in new API, from 2 to 3.
    Validate extension JSON: Error: Field 'classes/AStarGrid2D/methods/get_id_path/arguments': size changed value in new API, from 2 to 3.
    Validate extension JSON: Error: Field 'classes/AStarGrid2D/methods/get_point_path/arguments': size changed value in new API, from 2 to 3.

    Added optional "allow_partial_path" argument to get_id_path and get_point_path methods in AStar classes.
    Compatibility methods registered.

> The instructions for how to add to that file are at the top of the file itself.

Reviewer 2: Either here, or in the forth-coming instructions above, we should mention that in 99.99% of cases, we shouldn't be ignore the "hash changed" messages. If those don't go away on their own, then the developer will know they did something wrong with the compatibility methods.

Author: Think this belongs in the expected files to ensure they're found

Reviewer 3: I agree this is worth calling out here.
```suggestion
The instructions for how to add to that file are at the top of the file itself.

If you get a "Hash changed" error for a method, it means that the compatibility binding is missing or incorrect. Such lines shouldn't be added to the ``.expected`` file, but fixed by binding the proper compatibility method.
```

.. _doc_handling_compatibility_breakages:

> Handling compatibility breakages
> =================================

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Handling compatibility breakages
================================
```

So you've added a new parameter to a method, changed the return type,
changed the type of a parameter, or changed its default value,
and now the automated testing is complaining about compatibility breakages?

Not to worry, there's a system to handle just that!

Compatibility is handled in a few different ways. In GDScript this is simple,
new arguments are usually given default values when added, so existing scripts
won't break in such cases.

However in other cases, like GDExtension and C#, the exact way the method is
declared matters and must be matched exactly. This is handled by creating
compatibility methods that then get mapped to the new versions of these
methods. All of this happens *almost* automatically, there are just a few

> things you need to do.

Reviewer 3: I feel we need to call out the different types of "compatibility breakages" more explicitly:
- For GDScript, adding a new parameter at the end of a method prototype with a default value does not break compatibility, but it does for GDExtension and C#, as described here. This is the only "compat breakage" that is ok to do in general.
- All other compatibility breakages break GDScript even if compat methods are added, so they can only be done exceptionally with approval for the release management team.

Not sure how to clarify this, with the introduction already being a bit long. I think my main issue is that the light hearted "no worry, there's a system that lets you break compat" may give the wrong impression about what kind of changes are allowed by default.

Author: Agreed will see what I can come up with, maybe we can cut this down and make a separate page discussing the general topic of compatibility focused on the abstract instead of the specific

    ClassDB::bind_method(D_METHOD("my_method", "arg1", "arg2", "arg3"), &MyClass::my_method, DEFVAL(0));
    ClassDB::bind_compatibility_method(D_METHOD("my_method", "arg1", "arg2"), &MyClass::_my_method_bind_compat_1234);

The extension validation system
-------------------------------

You also need to handle updating the expected output of the compatibility checks.

As part of the normal set of checks that run on every PR there's one that checks for compatibility with extensions.
This checks the API generated by the engine against that of previous versions, as well as files containing the expected
results.

To tell the system that the changes made in a PR were not by mistake but intentional compatibility breakages you need
to add the results of this check to the relevant validation file. These files are stored under ``misc/extension_api_validation/``
and are named in two ways. Either a short name with just one version in it, like ``4.2-stable.expected``, or two versions,
one after another, like ``4.1-stable_4.2-stable.expected``. Most of the time you only need to care about the first type, which will
have the version number of the most recently released version.

> The specific instructions for what to do when this check fails are at the top of each of these files.

Author: Might be a bit rambling, any suggestions would be welcome

Reviewer 3: I feel those two generic sections tend to overlap with explanations given below in the practical example, especially the one about binding compat methods which I would expect to explain how to name the compat method, where to place it, etc.

Maybe we could introduce the example from the start and not try to have standalone generic explanations, but use the example throughout to make the generic bits clearer?

Author: Dropping the generics, didn't feel any of it was useful to integrate into the practical example

A practical example
-------------------

These changes are taken from `pull request #88047 <https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/88047>`_, which added

> new pathing options to ``AStarGrid2D``. Which among other changes changed these methods in ``core/math/a_star_grid_2d.h``:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
new pathing options to ``AStarGrid2D`` and other AStar classes. Among other changes, these methods were modified in ``core/math/a_star_grid_2d.h``:
```

.. code-block:: cpp

    Vector<Vector2> get_point_path(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to);
    TypedArray<Vector2i> get_id_path(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to);

To:

.. code-block:: cpp

    Vector<Vector2> get_point_path(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to, bool p_allow_partial_path = false);
    TypedArray<Vector2i> get_id_path(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to, bool p_allow_partial_path = false);

> This meant adding new compatibility bind methods to the file, which should be in the ``protected`` section of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This meant adding new compatibility method bindings to the file, which should be in the ``protected`` section of
```

> the code, usually placed next to ``bind_methods()``:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the code, usually placed next to ``_bind_methods()``:
```

.. code-block:: cpp

    #ifndef DISABLE_DEPRECATED
        TypedArray<Vector2i> _get_id_path_bind_compat_88047(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to);
        Vector<Vector2> _get_point_path_bind_compat_88047(const Vector2i &p_from, const Vector2i &p_to);
        static void _bind_compatibility_methods();
    #endif

> They should start with a ``_`` to indicate that they are internal, and end with ``_bind_compat`` followed by the PR number

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
They should start with a ``_`` to indicate that they are internal, and end with ``_bind_compat_`` followed by the PR number
```

    /* MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. */
    /* IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY   */
    /* CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,   */
    /* TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE      */
    /* SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                 */
    /**************************************************************************/

    #ifndef DISABLE_DEPRECATED

    #include "core/variant/typed_array.h"

    TypedArray<Vector2i> AStarGrid2D::_get_id_path_bind_compat_88047(const Vector2i &p_from_id, const Vector2i &p_to_id) {
        return get_id_path(p_from_id, p_to_id, false);
    }

    Vector<Vector2> AStarGrid2D::_get_point_path_bind_compat_88047(const Vector2i &p_from_id, const Vector2i &p_to_id) {
        return get_point_path(p_from_id, p_to_id, false);
    }

    void AStarGrid2D::_bind_compatibility_methods() {
        ClassDB::bind_compatibility_method(D_METHOD("get_id_path", "from_id", "to_id"), &AStarGrid2D::_get_id_path_bind_compat_88047);

>         ClassDB::bind_compatibility_method(D_METHOD("get_point_path", "from_id", "to_id"), &AStarGrid2D::_get_point_path_bind_compat_88047);

Reviewer 3: Would be good to have an example that uses `DEFVAL()`, or at least this needs to be called out that if the previous binding of a method had default values assigned, the compatibility method should have them too.

Author: Will see if I can find another example that has that to replace this with to make the example more complete
